Okay, so in this section we're gonna go
through the entire interactive Svelte
tutorial.
And by the end of it you'll have
a complete grasp of what Svelte can do and
how you write Svelte components.
And so what I invite you to do is,
in a new tab open the tutorial,
go to Svelte.dev/tutorial, and we're
just gonna go through the whole thing
top to bottom, soup to nuts Now,
this has some introductory spiel that
I've already basically explained, so
we're gonna go down there and
click on the Next button, And
we'll begin with our
Hello world component.
So the first thing that you'll notice is
that we're writing HTML into this window
here, this app.Svelte window.
I'm gonna make this a little bit bigger so
that everyone can see.
And the reason that we use HTML as our
base language instead of JavaScript is
that HTML is designed to contain CSS and
JavaScript.
So all of the three languages of
the web they all fit together in
Svelte component in a very idiomatic way.
The first thing that we need
to do is add some data.
So gonna create a script tag up here,
and I'm gonna create a variable,
call it name, and we'll just
give it a value like that world.
And then inside the markup we can refer
to that value by putting it inside
curly braces like so.
Now inside these curly braces we
can have any valid JavaScript,
so we can change that to
, for example.
And then obviously as we change that,
It will rerender the application.
By the way, if you ever get stuck while
going through these tutorials and
you wanna just skip the end
result then you can click on
the Show me button down here and it will
take you straight to the end state and
then you can click Reset to
go back to the beginning.
Now in the same way that we can use curly
braces to put text inside our application,
we can use it inside element attributes.
So our image tag here is
missing a source attribute.
You just add one like that and
give it the value of src
which is in the script log.
Never gonna give you up.
Never gonna let you.
But Svelte is giving us a warning.
This orange bar beneath the markup
is telling us that an image
element should have an alt attribute.
And this is really important
this is an accessibility matter.
Most people when they're using a website
they can see the content of the image, and
they don't need an alt attribute but
there are a lot of users for
whom that's not true.
That includes people with impaired vision
who are using assistive technologies like
screen readers.
But it also includes people who are on
a slow connection, and they've got
the markup but it hasn't yet been able
to load the content of the image.
So it's very important that we always add
an alt attribute to describe what is in
the image.
So in this case, "A man dances".
Now accessibility is a big and
difficult topic and
there's no way that a framework like
Svelte can automatically check that you
are writing accessible
markup in every case.
For example, this alt tag could
be absolute gibberish and
it wouldn't know any better.
So you do have to understand the purpose
of the accessibility warnings and
make sure that you are actually
building accessible markup.
And that includes things like making sure
that the contrast ratios on the content
that you're building are high enough.
But Svelte will do the best that it can
to make sure that you're not making any
obvious mistakes like putting markup
that's inaccessible on the page.
Now we can also use the curly
braces inside attributes.
So let's say we wanted
to add a value name,
Then we can put that
inside attribute there.
And then if I open my Dev tools and
inspect this image,
You'll see that the alt attribute
has been applied as we'd expect.
Now, we very often run into this situation
here where we have an attribute name and
value that match, and so
we have a convenient shorthand in Svelte.
We can just get rid of the attribute
name and the equals and pass it
through like that, and that's something
that we do quite a lot in this workshop.
Now I mentioned before that a Svelte
component because it's HTML it can contain
JavaScript and the CSS, so
we're gonna add some CSS to our component.
We'll open a p selector, and
then we'll make it purple.
And give it a font.
And we'll bump up the size a little bit.
And you'll see that it's applied those
styles to the paragraph as we would
expect.
But wait, there's more Svelte
lets you have nested components.
That is to say a component
can contain other components.
And in that situation we don't want the
styles from one component to affect other
components on the page because then it
becomes very difficult to understand where
a given style is coming from.
So Svelte actually scopes the styles
inside a component to just the markup that
belongs in the same component.
And we can show this by adding a script
tag that imports our nested component,
just select that whole block and
paste it at the top of app.Svelte.
That imports the nested component,
which is visible in this tap here, and
then we'll put that
underneath our paragraph.
And so this paragraph has
the styles defined here, but
they don't affect this paragraph
even though it's the same element.
And the way that this works under
the hood is that Svelte scopes
the CSS selector with
a generated hash that is then
computed from the contents
of your style block.
It puts that class on the selector
in the CSS output and
it also puts it on the element.
And that way there's no possibility
of these selectors clashing
between different components.
And obviously it goes
the other way as well.
If I add a style here,
It will affect the child component but
not the parent component.
We can also do something else
that's quite interesting.
Normally when you're write in
CSS you have this phenomenon of
The Append-Only Stylesheet.
Where you add some styles, and
then you add some more styles, and
then you add some more styles and
then you're not sure if you still need
these styles but you're scared to remove
it because you don't know what is affected
by it because CSS is inherently global.
But because we don't have that problem
because our styles are scoped to
the component we can remove
the styles that aren't used
inside the component by
analyzing the CSS and
the markup together and seeing which
selectors aren't being applied.
So if we have this unused class here,
then we look at the CSS
output, That color red
has been stripped out.
It's not included in the CSS
that gets sent to browsers.
And it'll also give us a convenient
warning tells us that there's an unused
CSS selector so that we can go ahead and
remove that from our source scope.
By default, when you have a curly brace
with a JavaScript expression inside it,
it's evaluated as text.
Which means that if I click over to
the Result here this string contains
some HTML we can actually see
the angle brackets of that tag.
In some situations, you wanna put
the actual HTML onto the page and
that's really easy to do we
just prefix it with @html.
It's a special type of tag.
Then now you can see that
this is some bold text.
Now there is a big caveat here
there's no sanitization that happens.
What that means is that you could
potentially inject some dangerous HTML.
So you need to make sure that the HTML
that you're putting inside your component
comes from a source that you trust.
If it's coming from a source that you
don't trust, like some user input that you
don't control, then you need to make sure
that you sanitize that HTML to remove any
script tags or anything else that could
be used in a cross-site scripting attack
before you include that on a page
that is visible to another user.
Okay, so
we just had a great question about whether
you can add global styles if you need to.
So we're gonna skip back
to the section on Styling.
Sorry, the section on Master Components.
And we're gonna put that, That nested
paragraph inside the component.
And this time in our app.Svelte,
we're gonna change this p
selector to a global p selector.
And we do that using some syntax that
we stole from the CSS modules project.
It's : global is the modifier, and
then we wrap the (p) selector like so.
And now every p element on the page
will be affected by those styles.
And the way that that works, if you
look at the CSS output, it just hasn't
bothered to apply the scoping, select
the scoping class name to that selector.
So that's useful if you need to do
something like change the styles on
the body element because obviously,
you're not gonna have the body
element inside your component.
But generally, that's something that
you don't wanna use too much of.
If you have global styles,
I personally think that they
should go into global.CSS file.
That's where I put my rules
about colors and typography,
all of my CSS variables on the page.
But this is a useful escape hatch for
the times that you do need it.